Hi, welcome to the Haskell Weekly podcast.
This is a show about Haskell,
a purely functional programming language.
I am your guest, Sara Lichtenstein,
and I'm an engineer at ITProTV.
And this your host, Taylor Fausak.
>> Hi, I'm the lead developer at ITProTV.
Today, we're going to
be talking about Elm.
In particular, upgrading Elm from 0.18 to
0.19 which we recently did here at ITPro.
Sara was a big part of
that upgrade process, and
she wrote a blog post about it.
And so we're gonna be kinda digging into
that blog post and talking more about it.
Sara, do you wanna tell
us a little about Elm and
get us started on the upgrade path?
>> Absolutely, so
here at ITProTV, as you know,
as our lead engineer,
we use a lot of Haskell.
And luckily hand-in-hand with that goes
Elm, since it's written in Haskell.
So we use Elm for our front-end,
as I'm sure you're aware.
And we had quite an interesting
time upgrading from 0.18 to 0.19.
There was a couple things
that didn't go great.
But overall we've really enjoyed
the upgrade and using the upgrade.
>> And using Elm altogether.
>> Absolutely.
>> It's been great.
>> Yes.
>> Yeah, this upgrade didn't really
make us want to ditch Elm entirely.
We're still very much into Elm.
But what are some of the things that
didn't go well with the upgrade?
>> So what we noticed were there
was a couple breaking changes, for
example, the change from
the core date into time POSIX.
It didn't really have
the same functionality and
it's not in core anymore,
which is kind of a lot.
>> That's weird.
>> Yeah.
>> If it's not in core, where did it go?
>> It went to a library
called time from Elm, so
it's not in the Elm core part,
but it's in a time of it's own.
>> [LAUGH]
>> Ha ha.
>> A land before time, maybe.
They've moved it off into
their own official Elm-
>> Time library.
>> Yeah, okay, so it's still official,
it's just not included by default.
>> Right.
>> Got you.
And they changed a bunch of
stuff when they moved, it right?
>> Mm-hm.
>> So it's a little annoying
they did both of those
things at the same time.
>> Yeah, the functionality is
just totally different and
switching from date to
POSIX is not very seamless.
It's a little bit testy.
>> [LAUGH] Testy, that's a good word.
We wrote a lot of tests around this,
didn't we?
>> Yes, we did.
>> [LAUGH] Okay.
>> Actually, the only tests in
our database are about time, so.
>> Yeah [LAUGH].
You gotta be sure that you get time right,
I mean.
>> Mm-hm.
It's pretty important.
>> Yeah.
>> This weird construct
that we've created.
It's pretty important to get it right.
>> [LAUGH]
>> Very true, so
fortunately we were able to
get time right and move on.
But there were still some other
things that didn't go well.
What were they?
>> Well with the rest of our breaking
changes, we had some issues with
the navigation since now you have
to have this key concept in.
>> And what's that key concept?
>> So you pass a key in
your navigation through, so
instead of using, I think it's browser.
>> Yeah,
I think that's what it was before.
>> Yeah, I think was browser before.
So instead of using that,
you have to pass this key along.
Which is kind of helpful,
actually, once you get down to it.
But making that change was
a little bit more difficult
because it's a different
concept than using browser was.
>> Right, so instead of saying,
go to this particular URL or
this particular route,
you have to pass along a key that says.
I don't know, what does it say?
>> Like this is your route, I guess?
>> Okay.
>> But it makes more sense in my mind to
pass it around for the URL changes and
how to link it back and forth.
But making that change was
still a little bit difficult.
>> Got you.
>> So-
>> So you like where we ended up but
the path was maybe not so nice.
>> Yeah, exactly.
We had some changes with the HTTP library
as well, which again were great changes.
But the package felt like it had more
breaking changes than any other package
for us, which was obviously not great.
No one likes a breaking change.
>> Yeah and we do a lot of HTTP calls.
So maybe it's not so surprising,
but it's still annoying.
>> Mm-hm, exactly.
And then, just some function signature
changes that didn't quite make sense and
maybe could have come along with an
explanation that would have made them make
more sense to us.
>> Yeah.
>> So.
>> Yeah, it's kind of frustrating.
I don't remember the scope of these
changes, but it's on the order of,
the arguments change positions or
something like that.
>> Yeah.
>> Well sure,
I could see how it might be better but
is it really worth it?
>> Yeah, it would have been better if
that had come with an explanation as to
why it was changed and
what was the purpose.
Versus just making the change and
not really saying anything about it.
>> Yeah, well, I don't want to keep
harping on these breaking changes.
I know other stuff was
involved in the upgrade.
So what else went wrong?
>> So with all the breaking
changes came a broken compiler.
Which obviously, being familiar with
using Haskell and its great compiler, and
Elm and its even better compiler.
Cuz it's so friendly and nice.
>> [LAUGH]
>> And great with the errors.
Not having a compiler made it
very difficult to figure out
what exactly was going wrong and
how to fix it.
>> Yeah, and when you say broken compiler,
you don't mean that the Elm
compiler itself was broken.
You mean that it didn't work with
our project for a little while?
>> Right, when you're upgrading, you have
to upgrade the compiler simultaneously,
which makes it a lot more difficult.
Because if the compiler doesn't
work with what you're using,
I don't know how to phrase this.
>> Yeah so, as part of the upgrade,
they changed some syntax.
>> Yeah.
>> And
we couldn't write something that
worked both with the old compiler and
the new compiler.
>> Yep, yep.
>> So,
>> Those are the words I was looking for.
>> When we upgraded, Elm 19 just said,
nope, I can't deal with this file.
And that's a lot less useful than it
saying, the problem is right here,
like it normally does with the errors.
It points it straight to it and
it even says, hey,
maybe this is the solution
you're looking for.
>> So politely, is this what you meant?
>> [LAUGH] Yeah,
it's a very nice compiler.
>> Yes, Elm, thank you.
>> [LAUGH] Why can't it just
make the changes for us?
>> I know, that'd be too easy.
>> That maybe will be in Elm 20,
who knows?
>> Evan are you listening?
>> [LAUGH]
>> Elm 20.
>> So some of these problems sound
like they would have been solved or
at least made a little better
with better documentation or
explanation around the changes.
But I know we had problems
with the documentation itself.
Can you talk a little about that?
>> Yeah, so that's another big
issue is that once Elm 19 came out,
that 18 documentation just went away.
>> [LAUGH]
>> That's not great.
Luckily, we were able to find it, but
it took a lot of Internet digging,
which good thing we're engineers
familiar with the Internet.
>> That's 90% of our job.
>> Yeah,
we were able to find it eventually.
It currently lives on this GitHub page
which, hopefully it'll stay there so
that there's some sort of record of it.
But it would be really nice if on the Elm
website where the packages actually is,
it let you go back and
forth between the packages.
So you could see,
>> The old one.
>> This is what was in 18,
this is what's in 19,
this is what's in
whatever the next one is.
>> Yeah, the one that's coming up
to be prepared for the change.
>> Yeah, absolutely.
>> And you mentioned that this
old documentation was hosted on
some GitHub page.
It's not an official thing?
>> Is it an official thing?
>> I don't know.
>> I don't think so.
>> [LAUGH]
>> I don't remember where it lives.
>> I just remember one of the other
engineers was like, this is where it is.
And I was like, well great,
I'm glad it's somewhere.
>> Gotta bookmark that,
because I'll be coming back to it a lot.
>> Yep.
>> Yeah, it would be nice if it was
an official thing because then you could
count on it sticking around.
But if it's just something that
some enthusiast put together,
maybe he'll get tired of it and
it'll go away.
>> Exactly.
>> Fortunately,
we're done with the upgrade now.
But I'm sure people still haven't
upgraded and it would be nice for
them to use that same resource.
>> Yeah, we were pretty late to the game
cuz I think it came out last August.
>> Yeah.
>> And we didn't do ours until what,
February?
>> Yeah, we waited quite a while.
>> Yeah.
>> And one of the reasons we waited was so
that the packages in the ecosystem
would have an opportunity to upgrade.
But I remember being kinda surprised
because some of them weren't
upgraded, right?
Didn't we run into that?
>> I think so, yeah.
Yeah, cuz some of the community
packages were just no longer supported.
>> Yeah, they're like, sorry, they
don't support dates anymore, good luck.
>> Okay, which is absurd cuz we
specifically chose those packages for
like, Elm Community supports this.
They're totally gonna keep
this in the next one.
>> [LAUGH]
>> And then it was just like,
>> Psych.
>> Where'd it go?
[LAUGH]
>> Yeah.
>> So.
>> It feels kinda like we got bait and
switched.
>> Little bit.
>> They're like use the community packages
cuz they're not entirely official, but
more official than depending on some
random GitHub user/their Elm package.
>> And then they just became nonexistent.
>> Yeah, they just went away entirely.
>> For
the GitHub users whose packages we do use,
we use one for Elm Bootstrap and
for Elm Dropdown.
We had to fork those ourselves,
just to update them to 19 to work for us.
>> Yeah, and were we able to contribute
those changes back to them or
are we still relying on our own forks?
>> Just relying on our own forks.
But they work and that's great and
obviously that's something that happens.
If it's not a community-supported package,
you have to kind of be aware that you may
have to fork it and update it on your own.
So it's not a big deal, but
it was still just a small annoyance.
>> Yeah, yeah and
especially annoying because in Elm 19, you
can't depend directly on a fork, right?
>> Right.
>> You have to publish it to the Elm
package thing, so.
>> Yeah.
>> We have these weird packages that
are exactly the same as an existing one.
They just support a little different
version of the Elm compiler.
>> If you need the Elm 19 packages for
Elm Bootstrap or Elm Dropdown,
EdutainmentLIVE/ Elm Bootsrap,
or Elm Dropdown.
>> [LAUGH]
>> Shameless plug for our packages.
>> There we go.
[LAUGH]
>> [LAUGH]
>> Hit us up on our Patreon
page if you want this.
>> [LAUGH]
>> This is sponsored by stamps.com.
>> So, we had some small annoyances,
obviously, and we definitely have some
suggestions that we've talked about.
Maybe splitting up the update
to update the compiler first, or
let it be backwards
compatible a little bit.
Maybe have a bridge in between,
like a 18.5, to kind of bridge the gap.
>> Yeah, so that we can do this
upgrade kind of in pieces.
>> Steps.
>> Rather than upgrading all the packages
and the compiler and
everything all at once.
>> Yeah, cuz it was a humongous change
to our code base to upgrade an entire
project, so.
>> Yeah, and as you mentioned,
it was really annoying to
have it broken in the middle.
>> Absolutely.
>> Where you're like, well,
we had it working on 18, and
it was broken for a week.
And then it's working on 19, hopefully.
>> Yeah, maybe.
We'll find out.
>> [LAUGH]
>> Just kidding, it's totally working.
But yeah, obviously those would be
really great changes to make for
the next upgrade.
And maybe making that documentation
super easy to find for
everyone to just have record,
and have that available.
>> Mm-hm.
>> Thoughts,
[LAUGH] keep your documentation available.
[LAUGH]
>> Please.
>> Really important.
>> We actually do use it.
>> We need it.
>> Yeah, it's especially frustrating
because Elm has such good documentation.
>> Absolutely.
>> And then they just blow it all away
when they release a new version.
>> Exactly, which is crazy.
We want to keep it around, please.
>> [LAUGH]
>> Your users want it.
>> Yes, we your users.
>> We, your users,
want your documentation.
>> So I don't want this to be completely
a gripe session about the Elm upgrade.
I think that a lot of it went really well.
And even though we have ideas about things
that we would change in the future.
Let's talk a little about
the things that went well and
the stuff we like about Elm 19.
>> Absolutely, because we really do love
Elm 19 now that it's all upgraded and
it's usable.
And we've doing a lot of stories
in our Elm repository, and
it's been going very well.
There's a lot more Elm-supported packages,
so Elm community became just Elm.
And they have a lot more packages
that they support, like browser,
JSON, SVG, time and URL, which is great.
So hopefully those actually translate
into the next upgrade as well.
>> Yeah, and what makes it so
nice to have those in the Elm namespace?
>> Just having those be supported by
the language itself just makes it,
I lost my words.
>> More reliable.
>> Yeah.
>> [LAUGH]
>> Reliable, yeah.
>> Yeah, and as we noted, we depended
on that Elm Community package and
it went away.
And it seems like maybe they weren't
willing to commit to pull it into like
their core namespace.
But now that these ones
are in the core namespace,
we can be pretty sure that
they're not gonna go away.
Knock on wood, because this is
a gamble we made with Elm Community.
>> Not gonna actually knock on wood.
>> [LAUGH]
>> But yeah, other than that,
they removed the polymorphic
toString function and
replaced it by something like
Int.toString, I believe.
Which is a lot safer, and as we love
type safety, this is a great change.
>> Yeah.
>> Absolutely loving it.
>> So instead of having a function
that takes literally anything and
converts it to a string.
You have to be very specific and say, no
I wanna convert this integer to a string.
>> This is not JavaScript.
>> [LAUGH]
>> So
we are very specific about what
we want to become strings.
>> Thankfully, it is not JavaScript.
>> Bless.
>> [LAUGH]
>> The documentation is actually even
better in 19, which is great.
Their documentation just keeps improving,
just like the language,
which is fantastic.
>> Yeah, and it's really nice to see
Elm have this focus on documentation.
Where it seems like for them the package
isn't complete until it's documented and
documented well.
Versus looking at some Haskell packages,
sometimes you land on their documentation
and it's literally just
the type signatures.
And you think, well great,
this doesn't help at all.
>> What do I do with this?
Yeah.
>> Yeah.
[LAUGH]
>> Yeah, and then the HTTP package,
as we mentioned before,
has changed and it is much better.
So they have functions like
riskyRequest and riskyTask.
>> [LAUGH]
>> RiskyTask.
So you know that you're using
risky security policies.
I have pronunciation.
>> [LAUGH]
>> And the function signatures for
posting get got even better, so.
>> When you're reading the code
that makes an HTTP call,
it's clear when something uses
riskyRequest or riskyTask that you
need to be extra careful and look at
this and understand what it's doing.
Versus before, it would just say request
and you'd really have to dig in to
the details to figure out if
it's doing something weird
>> Yeah, absolutely.
>> Or risky, you might say.
>> [LAUGH] Such risk.
>> Now we're not the only ones that
have gone through this upgrade process.
We were really excited to see on
the Elm subreddit yesterday that
another company posted
their experience report and
mirrored a lot of the same
comments that we had.
So we're not alone in this process.
And I'm hopeful that Evan and the rest
of the Elm community will look at these
posts and think about how the upgrade
process can be better in the future.
>> Yeah, absolutely.
I think it's great that
we're not alone in this and
that other people are experiencing
the same sort of issues.
And other people are as invested as we are
in Elm that they wanna help make it better
as well.
And so
they're making these kinds of postings and
kind of trying to help
contribute to this community.
>> Absolutely.
Sara, any final thoughts?
>> As much as a headache as we've made
this sound, it really wasn't too terrible.
And we've learned so much along the way,
and we're really loving Elm 19.
And I highly recommend to anybody
who's interested in it to definitely
get in there and try it.
It's a really great language and
it's very well documented, and
it's definitely worth your time.
>> Sara, you gave us some
really good information today.
Thanks for being on the show with me.
>> Thank you for having me.
>> And thank you for
listening to the Haskell weekly podcast.
This has been episode two.
If you liked our show, find out more
at our website haskellweekly.news.
Thanks again for listening,
I've been your host, Taylor Fausak, and
we'll see you next week.
[MUSIC]